.TH LIBLEECH2 3 "2026-03-27" "leech2 0.2.0" "Library Functions"
.SH NAME
libleech2 \- C API for tracking CSV changes and producing SQL patches
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <leech2.h>
.PP
.BI "void lch_log_init(lch_log_callback_t " callback ", void *" user_data );
.PP
.BI "lch_config_t *lch_init(const char *" work_dir );
.br
.BI "void lch_deinit(lch_config_t *" cfg );
.PP
.BI "int lch_block_create(const lch_config_t *" cfg );
.PP
.BI "int lch_patch_create(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const char *" hash ", uint8_t **" buf ", size_t *" len );
.br
.BI "int lch_patch_to_sql(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len ", char **" sql );
.br
.BI "int lch_patch_applied(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len );
.br
.BI "int lch_patch_failed(const lch_config_t *" cfg );
.PP
.BI "void lch_patch_free(uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len );
.br
.BI "void lch_sql_free(char *" sql );
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B libleech2
is a C-compatible shared library for tracking CSV table changes using a git-like
content-addressable block chain. It computes deltas between table snapshots,
stores them as linked blocks, and produces consolidated patches that convert
into SQL statements for replaying changes on a target database.
.PP
The library operates on a work directory containing a configuration file
.RB ( config.toml
or
.BR config.json )
that defines tables, field schemas, filters, and other settings. See
.BR lch (1)
for configuration details.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Logging
.TP
.BI "void lch_log_init(lch_log_callback_t " callback ", void *" user_data )
Install a custom logger that delivers all log messages through
.IR callback .
Must be called before
.BR lch_init ()
for the callback to receive messages from initialization. May be called again to
replace the callback.
.I callback
must not be NULL.
.I user_data
is an opaque pointer forwarded to every callback invocation.
.SS Lifecycle
.TP
.BI "lch_config_t *lch_init(const char *" work_dir )
Initialize the library by parsing the configuration in
.IR work_dir .
Returns an opaque config handle on success, or NULL on failure. The caller must
eventually free the handle with
.BR lch_deinit ().
.I work_dir
must not be NULL.
.TP
.BI "void lch_deinit(lch_config_t *" cfg )
Free all resources associated with
.IR cfg .
Passing NULL is a safe no-op. After this call the handle is invalid and must not
be used.
.SS Block creation
.TP
.BI "int lch_block_create(const lch_config_t *" cfg )
Read the configured CSV sources, compute the new state, diff it against the
previous state, and write a new block together with updated STATE and HEAD
files. History truncation is performed afterwards.
.SS Patch operations
.TP
.BI "int lch_patch_create(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const char *" hash ", uint8_t **" buf ", size_t *" len )
Walk the block chain from HEAD back to
.I hash
and produce a consolidated patch. The patch is encoded (protobuf + optional zstd
compression) into a buffer written to
.I buf
and
.IR len .
.IP
If
.I hash
is NULL, the REPORTED hash is used as the starting point; if no REPORTED file
exists, genesis (the very beginning of the chain) is used.
.IP
Passing an explicit
.I hash
allows callers to bypass the built-in REPORTED mechanism and implement their own
system for tracking which blocks have been reported.
.IP
The buffer must eventually be freed with
.BR lch_patch_free ().
.TP
.BI "int lch_patch_to_sql(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len ", char **" sql )
Decode the patch in
.I buf
and produce SQL statements that apply the patch to a downstream database. Delta
payloads generate DELETE, INSERT, and UPDATE statements. State payloads generate
TRUNCATE followed by INSERT statements. All statements are wrapped in BEGIN /
COMMIT.
.IP
If the patch contains no actionable changes,
.I sql
is set to NULL and the function returns
.BR LCH_SUCCESS .
Otherwise, the string must be freed with
.BR lch_sql_free ().
.TP
.BI "int lch_patch_applied(const lch_config_t *" cfg ", const uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len )
Mark a patch as applied by updating the REPORTED file with the patch's head
hash. Future truncation uses this to know which blocks are safe to remove.
.TP
.BI "int lch_patch_failed(const lch_config_t *" cfg )
Mark a patch as failed by removing the REPORTED file. The next
.BR lch_patch_create ()
will produce a full state patch (TRUNCATE + INSERT for all tables). Safe to call
regardless of whether a REPORTED file exists.
.SS Memory management
.TP
.BI "void lch_patch_free(uint8_t *" buf ", size_t " len )
Free a patch buffer previously returned by
.BR lch_patch_create ()
without marking it as applied. Passing NULL is a safe no-op.
.TP
.BI "void lch_sql_free(char *" sql )
Free an SQL string previously returned by
.BR lch_patch_to_sql ().
Passing NULL is a safe no-op.
.SH TYPES
.TP
.B lch_config_t
Opaque configuration handle created by
.BR lch_init ()
and freed by
.BR lch_deinit ().
All API functions require a valid handle.
.TP
.B lch_log_level_t
Log severity levels:
.BR LCH_LOG_ERROR " (1),"
.BR LCH_LOG_WARN " (2),"
.BR LCH_LOG_INFO " (3),"
.BR LCH_LOG_DEBUG " (4),"
.BR LCH_LOG_TRACE " (5)."
Trace messages are only emitted in debug builds; release builds strip them at
compile time.
.TP
.B lch_log_callback_t
Callback function type:
.BI "void (*)(lch_log_level_t " level ", const char *" msg ", void *" user_data )."
The
.I msg
string is only valid for the duration of the callback invocation.
.SH RETURN VALUES
Functions returning
.B int
use the following convention:
.TP
.B LCH_SUCCESS (0)
The operation completed successfully.
.TP
.B LCH_FAILURE (\-1)
An error occurred. If a log callback was installed with
.BR lch_log_init (),
detailed error messages are delivered through it.
.PP
.BR lch_init ()
returns a pointer on success or NULL on failure.
.PP
.BR lch_deinit (),
.BR lch_patch_free (),
and
.BR lch_sql_free ()
do not return a value.
.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
.RS
.nf
#include <stdio.h>
#include <leech2.h>

static void log_cb(lch_log_level_t level, const char *msg, void *data) {
    (void)data;
    fprintf(stderr, "[%d] %s\\n", level, msg);
}

int main(void) {
    lch_log_init(log_cb, NULL);

    lch_config_t *cfg = lch_init("/path/to/.leech2");
    if (!cfg) return 1;

    if (lch_block_create(cfg) != LCH_SUCCESS) {
        lch_deinit(cfg);
        return 1;
    }

    uint8_t *buf;
    size_t len;
    if (lch_patch_create(cfg, NULL, &buf, &len) != LCH_SUCCESS) {
        lch_deinit(cfg);
        return 1;
    }

    char *sql;
    if (lch_patch_to_sql(cfg, buf, len, &sql) != LCH_SUCCESS) {
        lch_patch_free(buf, len);
        lch_deinit(cfg);
        return 1;
    }

    if (sql) {
        printf("%s", sql);
        lch_sql_free(sql);
    }

    /* Mark as applied on success, or failed on error */
    lch_patch_applied(cfg, buf, len);
    lch_patch_free(buf, len);

    lch_deinit(cfg);
    return 0;
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile with:
.PP
.RS
.nf
cc -o example example.c -lleech2
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lch (1)
.PP
Full documentation and source code:
.UR https://github.com/larsewi/leech2
.UE
